# Gross error detection in Digital Elevation models Using Metahuristic Algorithms
The detection and deletion of gross error of DEM data is a great concern in geospatial data analysis. In fact many statistical techniques are sensitive to the presence of gross errors, but there are many ambiguities in the results. This paper presents a new algorithm for detecting gross errors of irregular DEM data using Metaheuristic algorithms. We have used a classic and a modern tool of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in this research: The Genetic Algorithm (GA) and the Bees Algorithm (BA), respectively. The gross error methods we proposed are characterized by a common localization procedure: we examine the entire dataset by consideration iteratively only a small subset at a time; for each step we take into account the data belonging to a moving square window and we handle separately each data set. In each testing window we fit a bilinear surface to all surrounding points and estimate the residuals for each point. By the use of Genetic and Bee algorithms we try to minimum sum of squared residuals to towards detection of gross error point. Three simulation studies are conducted to verify our method. We compare the result of our blunder detection method with other implemented methods of geostatistical toolbox in ARC/INFO GIS software. The results demonstrated that the proposed method is more effective and feasible than those existing algorithms to detect single and cluster blunders with high accuracy and without any statistical techniques.
